---
layout: default
---
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/prova.css" media="screen" type="text/css">


<nav class="navigation">
  <ul>
    <li><a href="#">Education</a></li><!--
    --><li><a href="#">Pubblications</a></li><!--
    --><li><a href="#">Notifications</a></li><!--
    --><li><a href="#">Logout</a></li>
  </ul>
</nav>



Education
==========


2010
: Ph.D. in Marine Ecology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. Supervisors: Dr. Ransom Myers, Dr. Heike Lotze, and Dr. Andrew Rosenberg.

2003
: University Laurea degree (equivalent of Msc) in Marine Biology, *summa cum laude*, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy. Supervisors: Dr. Giorgio Bavestrello, Dr. Marino Vacchi and Dr. Simona Clo’.



Professional experience
=======================


2011 - Present| **Post-doctoral Fellow, Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University** 

Reconstructing baselines of structure and population levels of shark assemblages in natural ecosystems, quantifying the magnitude of change that occurred because of human perturbation, and identifying patterns of change. *Advisors:* Dr. Fiorenza Micheli (Stanford University) and Dr. Nick Dulvy (Simon Fraser University)

2003 - Present| **Shark Specialist for the IUCN**

Providing technical advice on elasmobranchs’ conservation status; contributing to reviews of draft SSC technical guidelines and CITES listing proposals; providing advice and materials for species conservation programs and workshops in the Mediterranean and North East Atlantic; ensuring that Red List Assessments of all covered species are accurate and up-to-date. 


October 2011 | **Consultant for NMFS - Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center**

Review of shark predation mitigation as a tool for conservation of the Hawaiian monk seal


January 2011 - March 2011| **Post-doctoral Fellow, at Dalhousie University** | 

Working on global shark abundance baselines. *Advisors:* Dr. Heike Lotze and Dr. Boris Worm 

August 2009 - August 2010 |**Biostatistician, EVOMED project.** | 

Analysis of time series of catch per unit effort from fishery independent data. *Project director*: Dr. Paolo Sartor, CIBM, 4, Viale Nazario Sauro, 57128 Livorno (Italy) 

August 2003 - December 2003| **Research Assistant, Pew Global Shark Assessment**. 

Data gathering analysis and presentation of results. Supervisor: Dr. Ransom Myers (Dalhousie University)

April 2003 - July 2003| **Internship, Dalhousie University**. 

Training in statistical modeling, data gathering, analysis and presentation of results within the BIODAQUA project. *Supervisor*: Dr. Ransom Myers (Dalhousie University)

June 2002| **Field Researcher, Polytechnic University of Marche**. 

Member of a scientific expedition to assess marine biodiversity on Host island (Croatia), designated as a potential spot for establishing a marine protected area. *Supervisors*: Dr. Roberto Danovaro and Dr. Giorgio Bavestrello (Polytechnic University of Marche)

April 2001 - April 2002 | **Field Researcher, Polytechnic University of Marche**. 

Monitoring thresher sharks and other large pelagic shark catches landed by commercial fishers and recreational anglers in the central Adriatic Sea. *Supervisors*: Dr. Simona Clo’ and Dr. Marino Vacchi, ICRAM, Via di Casalotti 300, 00166, Rome.

Teaching Experience
===================

June 2014
:	**Instructor**, course targeted to international PhD students, post-docs and researchers: “An introduction to Generalised Linear Models and extensions using R”. Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna.

September - October 2012
: 	**Instructor**, First Training Event within the Monitoring of Mediterranean Marine Protected Areas (MMMPA) project - Principles of experimental design applied to marine protected areas management. Marine protected area of Tavolara and Punta Coda Cavallo, Olbia, Italy | 
 
January - April 2012
: 	**Co-instructor**, Synthesis in Ecology 275 H, Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University

January - April 2007
: 	**Teaching Assistant**, Analysis of Biological Data BIOL 4062-5062 Dalhousie University 

September - December 2006
: 	**Teaching Assistant**, Introductory Ecology BIOL 2060, Dalhousie University, Dalhousie University

December 2005 - January 2006
: 	**Teaching Assistant**, Dalhousie Integrated Science Programme (DISP), Dalhousie University

Supervising Experience
======================

### ***PhD Students***

:---|---:
2013 - present| Rodrigo Barreto (Marine Biology, University of Recife, Brazil) | 
2013 - present| Camilla Novaglio (Quantitative Marine Science, University of Tasmania, Australia) | 
2013 - present| Azzurra Bastari (Marine Ecology, Polytechnic University of Marche, Italy)

### ***Honor and Master Students***

:---|---:
2014 - present| Stefano Moro (MSc in Biology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy) |
2012 - 2014| Annie Adelson (BSc in Biology, Stanford University).
Spring – Summer 2013| Emanuel Mazzilli (MEng in Computer Engineering, University of Reggio Emilia, Italy) 
2012 - 2013| Jacopo Beccacece (BSc in Marine Ecology, Polytechnic University of Marche, Italy) 
2010 – 2011| Gregory Britten (BSc in Biology and Statistics, Dalhousie University) | 


### ***Undergraduate Interns***

:---|:---
September 2014 - present | Edgar Sandoval (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Mariela Ceja (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Daniel Diaz (California State University of Monterey Bay) 
September 2014 - present |Arturo Lopez (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Brian De Anda (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Alcides Sorto (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Adilene Costante (California State University of Monterey Bay)
September 2014 - present |Brayanne Reyes Ron (California State University of Monterey Bay)
Summer 2103| Parker Phillips 
Summer 2103| Andy Alvarez (California State University of Monterey Bay)
Summer 2012|Owen O’Neal (Stanford University)
Summer 2012|Erin Bauman (Stanford University)
Summer 2012|Alex Alifimoff (Stanford University)



Skills and Competencies
=======================

**Languages:** Italian (mother tongue), English (fluent), working knowledge of Spanish and French.

**Computer:** Excellent computer literacy. Able to work in DOS, Windows, Mac OS X, and Unix/Linux operating systems. Knowledge of the whole suite of Microsoft Office programs. Able to program with different statistical (R, S-plus, SAS, Systat, Win/OpenBUGS, JAGS), mathematical (Matlab, Maple), geographic data processing (Generic Mapping Tools, ArcGIS), database management (SQL within MySQL, PostgreSQL, and MS Access), editing (LATEX, pandoc), web site compiling (HTML, CSS, PHP, Drupal, Javascript, Wordpress, Markdown), and general purpose programming languages (Bash, Perl, Awk, Python).

**Technical:** Broad experience in biometrics and data science. Proficient in statistical modeling both in a hypothesis testing and Bayesian framework. Able to compile, manipulate, integrate and analyze large datasets, and developing analytical approaches for estimating abundance and distribution of animal populations from multiple sources of data. Estensive experience in fitting generalized linear models and their extensions (e.g. glm, glmm, gam, gamm, zip, zinb etc.). Dealt extensively with unbalanced datasets with a substantial portion of missing information, over-dispersed data, and cases of zero inflation. Broad experience in research synthesis and pseudo experimental approaches often applied to fisheries (i.e. identifying natural experiments from exploited or perturbed ecosystems).




Publications
=============

Journal articles and book chapters
-----------------------------------

11.	Campana, S. and **Ferretti, F.** Chapter 40. Sharks and other elasmobranchs. In: __*World Ocean Assessment*__. United Nations. In Press.
12.	**Ferretti, F.**, Morey, G., Seret, B., Sprem, J.S. & Micheli, F. Falling through the cracks: the fading history of a large iconic predator. __*Fish and Fisheries*__. DOI: 10.1111/faf.12108 [View Publication.](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/faf.12108/abstract) 
13.	Micheli F., De Leo, G., **Ferretti F.**, Hines, A. M., Honey, K. T, Kroeker K., Martone, R., McCauley D. J., O’Leary, J. K., Rosim D. F., Sokolow S. Stock A., Wood C. L. Ocean Health. In: __*Handbook of Ocean Resources and Management*__, T. Agardy, H. Smith, and J. L. Suarez de Vivero (eds.). In Press
14.	Britten, G. L., Dowd, M., Minto, C., **Ferretti, F.**, Boero, F. & Lotze, H. K. 2014. Predator decline leads to decreased stability in a coastal fish community. __*Ecology Letters*__, 17 (12): 1518-1525.
15.	**Ferretti, F.**, Crowder, L. & Micheli, F. 2014. Using Disparate Datasets to Reconstruct Historical Baselines of Animal Populations, in: __*Marine Historical Ecology in Conservation*__: Applying the Past to Manage for the Future. (Kitinger, Gedan, Blight and McClenachan eds). University of California Press. [View Publication.](http://www.ucpress.edu/book.php?isbn=9780520276949)
16.	**Ferretti, F.** 2014. Geographical distribution and status. 7.2.1 Mediterranean Sea. In __*Sawfish: A Global Strategy for Conservation*__, Harrison LH, Dulvy NK (eds). IUCN Shark Specialist Group: Vancouver, Canada; 50-51.
17.	Micheli, F., B. S. Halpern, S. Walbridge, S. Ciriaco, **F. Ferretti**, S. Fraschetti, R. Lewison, L. Njakaer, and A. Rosenberg. 2013 Cumulative human impacts on Mediterranean and Black Sea marine ecosystems: assessing current pressures and opportunities. __*PLoS ONE*__, 8(12): e79889. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0079889
18.	**Ferretti, F.**, C. G. Osio, C. Jenkins, A. A. Rosenberg, & H. K. Lotze. 2013. Long-term ecological change in a meso-predator community in response to prolonged human disturbance.  __*Nature Scientific Reports*__, 3(1057): doi:10.1038/srep01057.
19.	Sala, E., Ballesteros, E., Dendrinos, P., Di Franco, A., **Ferretti, F.** et al. 2012. The structure of Mediterranean rocky reef   ecosystems across environmental and human gradients, and conservation implications. __*PloS ONE*__, 7(2): e32742. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032742
20.	McClenachan, L., **Ferretti, F.**, & Baum, J. 2012. From archives to conservation: why historical data are needed to set baselines for marine animals and ecosystems. __*Conservation Letters*__, 5(5): 349-359.
21.	**Ferretti, F.** In press. Sharks in the Mediterranean Sea: an example of using meta-analysis to infer trends in population abundance in data poor situations. In: Practical Guidebook for the Implementation of the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF) in the Mediterranean. WWF Mediterranean Program, Barcelona, Spain.
22.	Anderson, S.C, R. G. Farmer, F. Ferretti, A. L. Houde & J. A. Hutchings. 2011.  Correlates of Vertebrate Extinction Risk in Canada. __*BioScience*__, 61: 538-549.
1.	**Ferretti, F.** 2011. Peer review report of shark mitigation as a tool for conservation of the Hawaiian Monk Seal. Independent Peer Review Completed for the Center for Independent Experts (CIE)
23.	**Ferretti, F.**, B. Worm, G. Britten, M. Heithaus and H. Lotze. 2010. Patterns of shark decline and ecosystem consequences in the ocean. __*Ecology Letters*__, 13: 1055-1071.
24.	Romeo T., **F. Ferretti**, P. Consoli and F. Andaloro. 2009. Assessment of the Mediterranean swordfish based on the Italian harpoon fishery data. __*ICES CM*__ 2008/K:16, 1-14. 
25.	**Ferretti, F.**, R.A. Myers, F. Serena and H.K. Lotze. 2008. Loss of large predatory sharks from the Mediteranean Sea. __*Conservation Biology*__, 22(4): 952-964.
26.	Serena F. et al. 2008. Field identification guide to the Rays of the Mediterranean Sea. Guidelines for data collection and analysis. Societa' Italiana di Biologia Marina, comitato nekton e pesca, Gruppo Nazionale Risorse Demersali, Mediterranean Trawl Surveys. Livorno, Italy, (in Italian).
27.	**Ferretti, F.** and R.A. Myers. 2006. By-Catch of sharks in the Mediterranean Sea: available mitigation tools. In: __*Proceedings of the Workshop on the Mediterranean Cartilaginous Fish with emphasis on Southern and Eastern Mediterranean*__, Istanbul, Turkey. 158-169 (peer reviewed).
28.	**Ferretti, F.**, R.A. Myers, P. Sartor and F. Serena. 2005. Long Term Dynamics of the Chondrichthyan Fish Community in the Upper Tyrrhenian Sea.  __*ICES CM*__ 2005/N:25, 1-25.

### Technical reports, theses and consultancy works

1. **Ferretti, F. 2011.** Peer review report of shark mitigation as a tool for conservation of the Hawaiian Monk Seal. **Independent Peer Review Completed for the Center for Independent Experts (CIE)**
2. AA Rosenberg, F Micheli, E. Sala, G.C. Osio, **F. Ferretti**, P. Guidetti, S. Fraschetti, L. Mangialajo. 2011. Recovery Scenarios for the Northwestern Mediterranean Marine Ecosystem: motivating policy action on an ecosystem basis. **Oak Final Report**.
3. Sartor, P. et al. 2010. The 20th Century evolution of Mediterranean exploited demersal resources under increasing fishing disturbance and environmental change. **EVOMED. Joint tender n MARE/2008/11.** European Commission, Contract. N° SI2 5390 97.
4. **Ferretti. F.** 2010. The role of sharks in marine ecosystems: evaluating overexploited marine fish communities to detect long-term effects of predator removal. **PhD Thesis**, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
5. **Ferretti F.** 2003. Comportamento alimentare di Chimaera monstrosa nei fondi batiali Liguri. **Laurea Thesis**. Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy (in Italian).

### Policy and Public Outreach

1. Daly, L. and **Ferretti, F**. **2013**. How large-scale protection zones could benefit sharks and rays in the Mediterranean. **Shark Focus** 46: 14-15.
2. Lenfest Ocean Program. **2010**. Global consequences of shark declines. **Lenfest Ocean Program Research Series**. Washington DC.
3. Romeo, T., Consoli, P., Andaloro, F, & **Ferretti, F**. 2012. Pesca antica di pescespada e tonno nello Stretto di Messina. **Uomo e Natura.** 2(11) 39-45.
4. Rosetti, A. & **Ferretti, F**. **2009**. Gli Squali non fanno paura. **Slow Food**. 39: 70-74
5. Lenfest Ocean Program. **2008**. Shark declines in the Mediterranean Sea. **Lenfest Ocean Program Research Series**. Washington DC.

### Software

1.	Lopez, A., Sandoval, E. and Ferretti, F. 2015. SharkPulse v2.0 Mobile application software for  iOS. [Download App](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=edu.stanford.baseline.sharkpulse2)
1.	De Anda, B., Diaz, D. and Ferretti, F. 2015. SharkPulse v2.0 Mobile application software for Android OS. [Download App](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=edu.stanford.baseline.sharkpulse2)
1.	Ferretti, F. and Mazzilli, E. 2013. SharkPulse 1.1. Mobile application software for Android OS. [Download App](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=edu.stanford.baseline.sharkpulse)
2.	Ferretti, F. and Alvarez, A. 2013. SharkPulse v1.1. Mobile application software for iOS (iPhone). [Download App](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/sharkpulse-v1.1/id673243556?mt=8)



Seminars and Conference Talks
=============================
1. Novaglio, C., Ferretti, F., Smith, T., Frusher, S. Species-area relationships as indicators of human impact on fish communities. **Ecological Society of America** annual meeting, 10-15 **August 2014**, Sacramento, USA.
2. Ferretti, F., Jorgensen, S., Chapple, T., De Leo, G., & Micheli, F. Modeling shark attack data to infer patterns of shark abundance: a case study on the California white shark population. **Sharks International** 2014, 2-6 **June 2014**, Durban, South Africa.
3. Ferretti, F. A multi decadal natural experiment on large marine protected areas. Kick-off meeting for the Adriatic Ecosystem Recovery Project (AMER). Polytechnic University of Marche, **17^th^ December 2013**. Ancona, Italy.
4. Ferretti, F. Morey, G. Seret, B., Sprem, J. & Micheli, F. Sawfish in the Mediterranean Sea: vagrant species or case of regional extinction. 17^th^ **European Elasmobranch Association** Meeting. **1-3 November 2013,** Plymouth, UK.
5. Ferretti, F. Reconstructing Shark Baselines in the Ocean. **Explorer Society. Canada Chapter**. Victoria, 29 **May 2013**. **Invited.**
6. Ferretti, F. Reconstructing Shark Baselines in the Ocean. Polytechnic University of Marche. 13 **December 2012**, Ancona, Italy. **Invited.**
7. Ferretti, F. Priorities for elasmobranch research in the Mediterranean Sea. Panel of experts on the EU-MSFD and the role of the cartilaginous fishes. **European Elasmobranch Association Meeting**. Milan, 22-25 **November, 2012**. **Invited Speaker.**
8. James, K. & Ferretti, F. & Moore, J. & Lewison, R. & Curtis, K.A. & Dillingham, P. (2012). Global Chondrichthyan Catch and Bycatch: Status and Sustainability. World Congress of Herpetology, Vancouver, Canada, **August 8 - 14, 2012**, Book of Abstracts: 342
9. Ferretti, F. Morey, G. Seret, B. Harrison & L. Micheli, F. Sawfish in the Mediterranean Sea: vagrant species or case of regional extinction. Global Sawfish Conservation Strategy Workshop. IUCN Shark specialist Group. **21-24 May 2012**. Zoological Society of London, UK. **Invited Speaker**
10. Ferretti, F. The shark CPUE database: reconstructing baselines of abundance and community change. By-catch Risk Assessment Workshop. **6 – 8 March, 2012**. Southwest Fisheries Science Center (NOAA) in La Jolla, California
11. Ferretti, F. Reconstructing shark baselines in the ocean. Stanford University Shark Week. Stanford Coastal Society and Center for Ocean Solution. 6-10 **February 2012.** Stanford, California. **Invited Speaker.**
12. Ferretti, F. Osio, G., Jenkins, C. Rosenberg, A. and Lotze, H. Long-term ecological change in the elasmobranch community of the Adriatic Sea. Workshop on Stock Assessment of Selected Species of Elasmobranchs in the GFCM area; FAO, General Fishery commission for the Mediterranean and European Commission; **12-16** **December 2011**; Brussels, Belgium. **Invited Speaker.**
1. Ferretti, F. Mediterranean shark conservation assessments: using analyses of historical data to shape concrete conservation actions. International Marine Conservation Congress 2, Symposium: Integrating Marine Historical Ecology into Conservation and Management: Using the Past to Manage for the Future***.* 14-19** **May 2011**, Victoria (Canada).
1. Ferretti, F. Where Have All the Big Sharks Gone? Panel discussion on shark populations, fishing and finning. Center for the Future of the Oceans (CFFO). 21 **April 2011**, Monterey, California (USA). **Invited Speaker.**
1. Ferretti, F. Global Shark Declines and Why It Matters. COMPASS policy briefing: Healthy Predators, Healthy Ocean: Ecosystem roles of sharks and other predators. California Chamber of Commerce. 4 **April 2011**, Sacramento, California (USA). **Invited Speaker.**
1. P. Sartor, J. Cartes, D. Damalas, F. Ferretti, S. Kavadas, C. Osio, C. Maravelias, F. Maynou: Changes in demersal species composition and size over the past 50 years in the Mediterranean. Ocean Past III. 18-20^th^ **November 2010**, Dublin (Ireland).
1. Ferretti, F., C. G. Osio, C. Jenkins, A. A. Rosenberg, & H. K. Lotze. Long-term changes in the Adriatic demersal elasmobranch community in response to prolonged human disturbance. 14th EEA Scientific Conference 10-13th **November 2010**, Galway (Ireland).
1. Ferretti, F., B. Worm, G. L. Britten, M. R. Heithaus and H.K. Lotze. The role of sharks in marine ecosystems: insights from a global overview of changes in abundance and ecosystem consequences. Sharks International, 6-11 **June 2010**, Cairns (Australia).
1. Ferretti, F. Ecological change in meso-predator community in response to prolonged human disturbance: an example of methodological approach. EVOMED workshop, 1-5 March **2010**, Barcelona (Spain).
1. Ferretti, F. Analysis of projected Adriatic fishing effort from aggregated official statistisics and observer data. Workshop on analytical strategies for the “OAK Recovery Scenarios for the Northwestern Mediterranean Marine Ecosystem: motivating policy action on an ecosystem basis” project. 1-5 **February 2010**, Consevation International, Washington, DC (USA).
1. Ferretti, F., G.C. Osio, A.A. Rosenberg, & H.K. Lotze. 2009. The History of elasmobranch exploitation in the Mediterranean Sea: patterns of change and emerging consequences. Oceans Past II, 26-28 **February 2009**, Vancouver, British Columbia (Canada).
1. Osio, G.C. & F. Ferretti. 2009. Can we incorporate historical landings and CPUE’s into modern stock assessment? A comparative case in Italy and Spain. Oceans Past II, 26-28 **February 2009**, Vancouver, British Columbia (Canada).
1. Ferretti, F. Once upon a time there were sharks in the Mediterranean Sea. Sustainable Fisheries Management Workshop. 9-12 **December 2008**, Barcelona (Spain). **Invited Speaker**
1. Romeo, T., F. Ferretti (speaker), P. Consoli, S. Canese & F. Andaloro. Assessment of the Mediterranean swordfish based on the Italian harpoon fishery data. ICES Annual Science Conference, theme session on Small-scale and recreational fisheries surveys, assessment, and management (K), 22-26 **September 2008**, Halifax, Nova Scotia (Canada)
1. Ferretti, F. Assessment of the Mediterranean swordfish based on the Italian harpoon fishery data. HMAP-FMAP Workshop, 2-4 **October 2008**, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia (Canada).
1. Osio, G. C. and Ferretti, F. Historical fisheries data in the Mediterranean Sea. ICES workshop on historical data on fisheries and fish (WKHIST), 1115 **August 2008**, ICES Headquarters, Copenhagen.
1. Ferretti, F. Losing large predatory sharks from the Mediteranean Sea. Lenfest Ocean Program Press Conference, 11 **June 2008**, Rome (Italy).
1. McClenachan, L., F. Ferretti, H.K. Lotze, B. MacKenzie & G.C. Osio. 2008. Ecosystems in Search of Recovery: The Caribbean, Mediterranean, and Baltic Seas. AAAS Annual Meeting, 14-18 **February 2008**, Boston (USA).
1. Baum (speaker), J.K., L. Lucifora (speaker) & F. Ferretti (speaker). The Global Shark Assessment. Scientific and conservation achievements to date and forthcoming contributions. Pew Conference series on supported shark research, 27 **November 2007**. Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia (Canada).
1. Osio G.C. & F. Ferretti. Modelling the historical trends of the Adriatic Sea demersal assemblages as a basis for ecosystem recovery. ECEM Conference, 27-30 **November 2007**, Trieste (Italy).
1. Ferretti, F., R.A. Myers, G.C. Osio, H.K. Lotze & A.A. Rosenberg. 2007. The Mediterranean Sea: a case study to explain the ecological role of elasmobranchs in the marine ecosystem. Joint Italian Association of Oceanography and Limnology (AIOL) - Italian Ecological Society (SItE) meeting, 17-20 **September 2007**, Ancona (Italy). **Invited speaker**.
1. Ferretti, F. Long term analyses of demersal fish communities in the Adriatic Sea from multiple scientific surveys. Workshop on Statistical Methods for Marine Ecological Data. 7-8 **June 2007**, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia (Canada).
1. Ferretti, F. 2007. Status of Mediterranean elasmobranchs: a preliminary overview. WWF-Italia, 3 **January 2007**, Rome (Italy).
1. Ferretti F. By-catch of sharks in the Mediterranean: mitigation tools. Workshop on the Mediterranean Cartilaginous Fish with emphasis on Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, 14-16 October 2005, Istanbul (Turkey). **Invited Speaker**
1. Ferretti F., R.A. Myers, P. Sartor & F. Serena. Long Term Dynamics of the Chondrichthyan Fish Community in the Upper Tyrrhenian Sea. ICES Annual Science Conference, theme session on elasmobranch fisheries science (N), 20-24 **September 2005**, Aberdeen, Scotland (U.K)
1. Lucifora L., F. Ferretti & R. A. Myers. Shark management: the Good, the Bad and the Ugly. Mote Marine Laboratory Symposium, 9-11 **November 2004**, Sarasota, Florida (U.S.A).
1. Ricard D., R.A. Myers, L. Lucifora, F. Ferretti & A. Porter. Integrating the OBIS schema into the information system that supports the Pew Global Shark Assessment. Ocean Biodiversity Informatics International Conference on Marine Biodiversity Data Management, 29 November - 1 **December 2004**, Hamburg (Germany).

Posters
=======


1. Leone, A. Carlisle, A., Serena, F., Leeney, R., Litvin, S.Y, & Ferretti, F. Restoring the history of sawfish in the Mediterranean from museum exhibits. Annual Conference of the Italian Association of Scientific Museums (ANMS). **12 October 2014**, Livorno, Italy.
1. Adelson, A., Ferretti, F. & Micheli, G. Changing abundances of white sharks (*Carcharodon carcharias*) in the Mediterranean Sea. World Congress of Herpetology, **August 8 - 14, 2012,** Vancouver, Canada.
1. Barreto, R. R., Ferretti, F., Flemming, J., Andrade, H., Amorim, A., Santana, F., Worm, B., and Lessa, R. Inferring sharks population’s trends in the South Atlantic Ocean (SAO). **Sharks International** **2014**, 2-6 June 2014, Durban, South Africa (Poster presentation).
1. Mancusi, C. *et al.* MEDLEM Database, A data collection on large cartilaginous fishes in the Mediterranean basin. **Sharks International 2014**, 2-6 June 2014, Durban, South Africa (poster).
1. Ferretti, F., Jorgensen, S., Chapple, T., De Leo, G. & Micheli, F. Modeling shark attacks off the Coast of California to infer trends in abundance of the local great white shark population. Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. Community Retreat. **April 4-6 2013**. Aptos, California. (Poster presentation.)
1. Ferretti, F. Reconstructing Shark Baselines in the Ocean. Hopkins Marine Station Open House, 29 October 2011, Pacific Grove, California. (Poster presentation.)


Policy, Communication and Outreach Experience
=============================================
 
 - Received formal communication training at the [COMPASS](http://www.compassonline.org) Communications Training Workshop for the Ecosystem-Based Management Forum for Early Career Scientists (Porthsmouth, NH, 12-14 December 2007).
 - Given interviews to international press agencies, newspapers, radio and television stations including the BBC, The New York Times, The Times, Washington post, and Le Monde.
 - Collaborated with Lenfest Ocean Program and Communications INC of London to prepare a press conference for the paper Conserv. Biol. 22(4): 952-964 about the status of sharks in the Mediterranean Sea. Rome, 7-11 June 2008.
 - Collaborated with COMPASS and the Monterey Bay Aquarium in briefing and communicating to Senators and Assembly members of the State of California about the global state of sharks for the [discussion of the shark fin trade bill of California, AB376](assets/SacramentoBriefing.html).


Projects
========

:-----|-----:
Palmyra Coral Recruitment Project (PI: McCauley, D. and Micheli F.) | 2013 - 2016
Palmyra connectivity Project (PI: Micheli, F. and De Leo, G.) | 2013 - 2016
Adriatic Marine Ecosystem Recovery (Principal Investigator) | 2013 - 2016
Lenfest Global Shark Baseline Project (Principal Investigator) |  2011 - 2015
Lenfest Mediterranean Shark Assessment (Principal Investigator)| 2007 - 2010
Pew Global Shark Assessment (PI: Myers, R.A.)| 2003 - 2007
Future of Marine Animal Populations (FMAP) of the Census of Marine Life (COML) (PI: Myers, R.A., Lotze, H.K. and Worm, B.) | 2004 - 2011
History of Marine Animal Populations (HMAP) of the COML (PI: Lotze, H.K. and Rosenberg, A.A.) | 2004 - 2010
OAK Mediterranean recovery scenarios project (PI: Rosenberg, A.A., Micheli, F. and Sala, E.) | 2007 - 2010
The 20th Century evolution of Mediterranean exploited demersal resources under increasing fishing disturbance and environmental change (EVOMED) (PI: Sartor, P.) |  2009 - 2010



Fellowships, Scholarships and Research Grants
---------------------------------------------

:----|-----:
Research Grant Polytechnic University of Marche (250,000 EUR) | December 2013 – December 2016
Stanford University VPUE program (5,600 USD) | June 2013
Stanford University VPUE program (11,200 USD) | June 2012
Research grant from Lenfest Ocean Program (300,000 USD) | August 2011- June 2015
Fellowship from Lenfest Ocean Program (100,00 USD) | September 2007-December 2010
Dalhousie University Patrick F. Lett Bursary (7,500 CAN) | May 2007 – August 2007
Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research Grant Scholarships, Dalhousie University (20,000 CAN per year)  | September 2006 – August 2007
Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research Grant Scholarships, Dalhousie University (27,500 CAN per year)  | September 2004 – August 2006
Faculty Research Grant Scholarship Dalhousie University (18,000 CAN)| January 2004 – August 2005
Biodaqua Scholarship Polytechnic University of Marche (3,000 EUR)| April 2003 – July 2003

Referee services
----------------

Acta Adriatica, Advances in Oceanography and Limnology, Aquatic Living
Resources, Cahiers De Biologie Marine, Biological Conservation,
Conservation Biology, Deep Sea Research, Ecology Letters, Endangered
Species Research, Estuaries and Coasts, Fish and Fisheries, Fisheries
Research, Marine and Freshwater Research, Journal of Natural History,
Marine Environmental Research, Marine Ecology Progress Series,
Pan-American Journal of Aquatic Sciences, PLoS One, Proceedings of the
Biological Association of UK, series B, Proceedings of the Royal Society
B., Trends in Ecology and Evolution

References
==========

Fiorenza Micheli, Ph.D. Professor Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford
University Pacific Grove, CA 93950, USA Phone: +1 831 655-6250 Fax: +1
831 375-0793 e-mail: <micheli@stanford.edu>

Heike K. Lotze, PhD Canada Research Chair in Marine Renewable Resources
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University 1355 Oxford Street, Halifax,
NS, B3H 4J1, Canada Phone: +1 902 494 3406 e-mail: hlotze@dal.ca Web:
<http://lotzelab.biology.dal.ca>

Andrew A. Rosenberg, Ph.D. director of the Center for Science and
Democracy at the Union of Concerned Scientists, Two Brattle Sq.
Cambridge, MA 02138-3780 Phone +1 202-331-5458 e-mail:
<arosenberg@ucsusa.org>

Boris Worm, Ph.D. Professor Department of Biology, Dalhousie University
1355 Oxford St., Halifax, NS, B3H 4J1, Canada Phone: +1 902 494 2478
Fax: +1 902 494 3736 E-mail bworm@dal.ca Web
<http://wormlab.biology.dal.ca>

Giulio De Leo, Ph.D. Professor Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford
University Pacific Grove, CA 93950, USA Phone: +1 831 655-6202 Fax: +1
831 375-0793 e-mail: <deleo@stanford.edu>
